README.md, before:

---
Introduction
---
Proton is a tool for use with the Steam client which allows games which are
exclusive to Windows to run on the Linux operating system. It uses Wine to
facilitate this.

Most users will prefer to use Proton provided by the Steam client itself.  The
source code is provided to enable advanced users the ability to alter
Proton.  For example, some users may wish to use a different version of Wine with
a particular title.

---
Getting Started with Proton from Steam Play
---
* As the new Steam Play is still in Beta, it is recommended that you opt into the [Steam Client Beta](https://steamcommunity.com/sharedfiles/filedetails/?id=182912431) for the latest features and fixes.
* Proton requires graphics drivers that are more recent than what is typically packaged in most distributions; please read the [list of requirements and quickstart for Ubuntu 18.04 users](https://github.com/ValveSoftware/Proton/wiki/Requirements)
* Install and play games! Please refer to [this post](https://steamcommunity.com/games/221410/announcements/detail/1696055855739350561) for more information.
* Visit the [changelog](https://github.com/ValveSoftware/Proton/wiki/Changelog) for information about recent updates.

---
Obtaining Proton from source
---
**NOTE:** If you are not comfortable in a command line terminal, or if you find
any of the information presented in here strange and uncomfortable, then
this is probably not for you.  The instructions are likely to be incomplete
and require some knowledge and skill on your part, and there is no warranty
or guarantee that anyone will help you with this process.

We strongly recommend that most users use the production build of Proton.

The most current source for Proton is here:
  <https://github.com/ValveSoftware/Proton>

Which you can clone to your system with this command:

        git clone https://github.com/ValveSoftware/Proton.git proton

After cloning the Proton git repository, the next step will be to
obtain the various submodules that go into building Proton:

        cd proton
        git submodule update --init

If you wish to change any subcomponent, now is the time to do so.
For example, if you wish make changes to Wine, you would apply those
changes to the <tt>wine/</tt> directory.

---
Building
---
At a high level, the build instructions are:

1. Set up your build environment
1. Configure the build
1. Build Proton
1. Install Proton locally (optional)

See below for more details on all of these steps. Please read all of the
instructions before proceeding.

---
Set up the build environment
---
Proton has a lot of build-time dependencies. The following instructions
describe how we create the build environment for the production builds of
Proton. For reproducibility and security reasons, we will be setting up a
Debian 9 virtual machine. However, you should be able to follow these
instructions on other distributions as well.

Proton provides a Vagrantfile, which will automatically set up the Debian 9 VM
for you. After installing [Vagrant](https://www.vagrantup.com/), initialize the
VM by running from within the Proton directory:

        vagrant up

It will take a long time to download and install the Steam runtime containers
and so on. Eventually it will complete. You can SSH into the virtual machine
with:

        vagrant ssh

The Vagrantfile is set up to rsync the `proton` directory into the VM on boot,
and it will create a `build` directory in `$HOME` that is ready for you to run
`make`. On the host machine, you can use `vagrant rsync-auto` to have Vagrant
automatically sync changes on your host machine into the build machine. It is
recommended that you make changes on your host machine, and then perform the
build in the VM. Any changes you make in the `proton` directory on the VM may
be overwritten by later rsync updates from the host machine.

The Vagrantfile also creates a directory called `vagrant_share` in the `proton`
directory of your host machine, which is mounted at `/vagrant` within the VM.
You can use this shared folder to move your Proton build out of the VM, or as
one way to copy files into the VM.

When you are done with the VM, you can shut it down from the host machine:

        vagrant halt

Please read the Vagrant documentation for more information about how to use
Vagrant VMs.

If you do not wish to use Vagrant, you can read through both Vagrantfile and
`vagrant-user-setup.sh` for the list of dependencies and instructions on how to
set up your own machine or another VM of your choosing. It is aimed at Debian
9, but you should be able to adapt them for other distributions.

---
Alternative: Building without the Steam Runtime
---
The Steam Runtime provides a clean and consistent set of libraries. Software
distributed through Steam should depend only on libraries available through the
runtime, and so we build in that environment for production Proton builds. The
Vagrantfile described above will set this up for you.  However, if you are
simply making a build for yourself, you may want to skip setting up the Steam
runtime, as it takes a very long time to set up. To do this, edit the
`vagrant-user-setup.sh` script appropriately before running `vagrant up`.

---
Configure the build
---
After setting up the build system, it is time to run the configure script which
will generate the Makefile to build your project. The Vagrantfile is set up to
do this automatically for you in a directory called `$HOME/build` within the
VM. If you are configuring manually, run these steps:

        mkdir proton/mybuild/
        cd proton/mybuild
        ../configure.sh --steam-runtime64=docker:steam-proton-dev --steam-runtime32=docker:steam-proton-dev32 --with-ffmpeg

If you are building without the Steam runtime, then instead use:

        ../configure.sh --no-steam-runtime --with-ffmpeg

**Tip**: If you are building without the Steam runtime, you should now run
`make obj-wine64/Makefile obj-wine32/Makefile` and check the files
`obj-wine64/config.log` and `obj-wine32/config.log` for missing packages.
Search for `won't be supported`. A couple of missing packages are normal:
`opencv`, `gstreamer`, `vkd3d`, `oss`. More than that may indicate a problem.
Please see your distro's documentation to acquire the considerable build
dependencies for Wine.

---
Build Proton
---
A couple of Makefile targets are provided.

`make dist` will create a Proton installation in `dist/` that you can install
manually (see below), or automatically with `make install`.

`make deploy` will package Proton up for distribution via Steamworks.

---
Install Proton locally
---
Steam ships with several versions of Proton, which games will use by default or
that you can select in Steam Settings's SteamPlay page. Steam also supports
running games with local builds of Proton, which you can install on your
machine. The `install` target will perform the below steps for you.

To install a local build of Proton into Steam, make a new directory in
`~/.steam/steam/compatibilitytools.d/` with a tool name of your choosing and
place the contents of `dist` into that folder. The `make install` target will
perform this task for you, installing the Proton build into the Steam folder
for the current user. You will have to restart the Steam client for it to pick
up on a new tool.

A correct local tool installation should look like this:

        compatibilitytools.d/my_proton/
        ├── compatibilitytool.vdf
        ├── filelock.py
        ├── LICENSE
        ├── proton
        ├── proton_dist.tar.gz
        ├── toolmanifest.vdf
        ├── user_settings.sample.py
        └── version

Each component of this software is used under the terms of their licenses.  See
the <tt>LICENSE</tt> files here, as well as the <tt>LICENSE</tt>,
<tt>COPYING</tt>, etc files in each submodule and directory for details. If you
distribute a built version of Proton to other users, you must adhere to the
terms of these licenses.

----
Runtime Config Options
----
Proton can be tuned at runtime to help certain games run. The Steam client sets
some options for known games using the <tt>STEAM_COMPAT_CONFIG</tt> variable.
You can override these options using the environment variables described below.
The best way to set these environment overrides for all games is by renaming
`user_settings.sample.py` to `user_settings.py` and modifying it appropriately.
If you want to change the runtime configuration for a specific game, you can
use the `Set Launch Options` setting in the game's `Properties` dialog in the Steam client. You can launch the
game as you would with "`PROTON_VARIABLE=1 %command%`" [(source)](https://superuser.com/questions/954041/how-to-set-an-environment-variable-for-an-specific-game-on-steam-for-linux#980437).

To enable an option, set the variable to a non-<tt>0</tt> value.  To disable an
option, set the variable to <tt>0</tt>. To use Steam's default configuration, do
not specify the variable at all.

All of the below are runtime options. They do not effect permanent changes to
the Wine prefix. Removing the option will revert to the previous behavior.

| Compat config string  | Environment Variable           | Description  |
| :-------------------- | :----------------------------- | :----------- |
|                       | <tt>PROTON_LOG</tt>            | Convenience method for dumping a useful debug log to `$HOME/steam-$APPID.log`. For more thorough logging, use `user_settings.py`. |
|                       | <tt>PROTON_DUMP_DEBUG_COMMANDS</tt> | When running a game, Proton will write some useful debug scripts for that game into `$PROTON_DEBUG_DIR/proton_$USER/`. |
|                       | <tt>PROTON_DEBUG_DIR<tt>       | Root directory for the Proton debug scripts, `/tmp` by default. |
| <tt>wined3d</tt>      | <tt>PROTON_USE_WINED3D</tt>    | Use OpenGL-based wined3d instead of Vulkan-based DXVK for d3d11 and d3d10. This used to be called `PROTON_USE_WINED3D11`, which is now an alias for this same option. |
| <tt>nod3d11</tt>      | <tt>PROTON_NO_D3D11</tt>       | Disable <tt>d3d11.dll</tt>, for games which can fall back to and run better with d3d9. |
| <tt>noesync</tt>      | <tt>PROTON_NO_ESYNC</tt>       | Do not use eventfd-based in-process synchronization primitives. |

<!-- Target:  GitHub Flavor Markdown.  To test locally:  pandoc -f markdown_github -t html README.md  -->

Commit message:

Update README with Gallium Nine variable

README.md, after:

---
Introduction
---
Proton is a tool for use with the Steam client which allows games which are
exclusive to Windows to run on the Linux operating system. It uses Wine to
facilitate this.

Most users will prefer to use Proton provided by the Steam client itself.  The
source code is provided to enable advanced users the ability to alter
Proton.  For example, some users may wish to use a different version of Wine with
a particular title.

---
Getting Started with Proton from Steam Play
---
* As the new Steam Play is still in Beta, it is recommended that you opt into the [Steam Client Beta](https://steamcommunity.com/sharedfiles/filedetails/?id=182912431) for the latest features and fixes.
* Proton requires graphics drivers that are more recent than what is typically packaged in most distributions; please read the [list of requirements and quickstart for Ubuntu 18.04 users](https://github.com/ValveSoftware/Proton/wiki/Requirements)
* Install and play games! Please refer to [this post](https://steamcommunity.com/games/221410/announcements/detail/1696055855739350561) for more information.
* Visit the [changelog](https://github.com/ValveSoftware/Proton/wiki/Changelog) for information about recent updates.

---
Obtaining Proton from source
---
**NOTE:** If you are not comfortable in a command line terminal, or if you find
any of the information presented in here strange and uncomfortable, then
this is probably not for you.  The instructions are likely to be incomplete
and require some knowledge and skill on your part, and there is no warranty
or guarantee that anyone will help you with this process.

We strongly recommend that most users use the production build of Proton.

The most current source for Proton is here:
  <https://github.com/ValveSoftware/Proton>

Which you can clone to your system with this command:

        git clone https://github.com/ValveSoftware/Proton.git proton

After cloning the Proton git repository, the next step will be to
obtain the various submodules that go into building Proton:

        cd proton
        git submodule update --init

If you wish to change any subcomponent, now is the time to do so.
For example, if you wish make changes to Wine, you would apply those
changes to the <tt>wine/</tt> directory.

---
Building
---
At a high level, the build instructions are:

1. Set up your build environment
1. Configure the build
1. Build Proton
1. Install Proton locally (optional)

See below for more details on all of these steps. Please read all of the
instructions before proceeding.

---
Set up the build environment
---
Proton has a lot of build-time dependencies. The following instructions
describe how we create the build environment for the production builds of
Proton. For reproducibility and security reasons, we will be setting up a
Debian 9 virtual machine. However, you should be able to follow these
instructions on other distributions as well.

Proton provides a Vagrantfile, which will automatically set up the Debian 9 VM
for you. After installing [Vagrant](https://www.vagrantup.com/), initialize the
VM by running from within the Proton directory:

        vagrant up

It will take a long time to download and install the Steam runtime containers
and so on. Eventually it will complete. You can SSH into the virtual machine
with:

        vagrant ssh

The Vagrantfile is set up to rsync the `proton` directory into the VM on boot,
and it will create a `build` directory in `$HOME` that is ready for you to run
`make`. On the host machine, you can use `vagrant rsync-auto` to have Vagrant
automatically sync changes on your host machine into the build machine. It is
recommended that you make changes on your host machine, and then perform the
build in the VM. Any changes you make in the `proton` directory on the VM may
be overwritten by later rsync updates from the host machine.

The Vagrantfile also creates a directory called `vagrant_share` in the `proton`
directory of your host machine, which is mounted at `/vagrant` within the VM.
You can use this shared folder to move your Proton build out of the VM, or as
one way to copy files into the VM.

When you are done with the VM, you can shut it down from the host machine:

        vagrant halt

Please read the Vagrant documentation for more information about how to use
Vagrant VMs.

If you do not wish to use Vagrant, you can read through both Vagrantfile and
`vagrant-user-setup.sh` for the list of dependencies and instructions on how to
set up your own machine or another VM of your choosing. It is aimed at Debian
9, but you should be able to adapt them for other distributions.

---
Alternative: Building without the Steam Runtime
---
The Steam Runtime provides a clean and consistent set of libraries. Software
distributed through Steam should depend only on libraries available through the
runtime, and so we build in that environment for production Proton builds. The
Vagrantfile described above will set this up for you.  However, if you are
simply making a build for yourself, you may want to skip setting up the Steam
runtime, as it takes a very long time to set up. To do this, edit the
`vagrant-user-setup.sh` script appropriately before running `vagrant up`.

---
Configure the build
---
After setting up the build system, it is time to run the configure script which
will generate the Makefile to build your project. The Vagrantfile is set up to
do this automatically for you in a directory called `$HOME/build` within the
VM. If you are configuring manually, run these steps:

        mkdir proton/mybuild/
        cd proton/mybuild
        ../configure.sh --steam-runtime64=docker:steam-proton-dev --steam-runtime32=docker:steam-proton-dev32 --with-ffmpeg

If you are building without the Steam runtime, then instead use:

        ../configure.sh --no-steam-runtime --with-ffmpeg

**Tip**: If you are building without the Steam runtime, you should now run
`make obj-wine64/Makefile obj-wine32/Makefile` and check the files
`obj-wine64/config.log` and `obj-wine32/config.log` for missing packages.
Search for `won't be supported`. A couple of missing packages are normal:
`opencv`, `gstreamer`, `vkd3d`, `oss`. More than that may indicate a problem.
Please see your distro's documentation to acquire the considerable build
dependencies for Wine.

---
Build Proton
---
A couple of Makefile targets are provided.

`make all dist` will create a Proton installation in `dist/` that you can install
manually (see below), or automatically with `make install`.

`make deploy` will package Proton up for distribution via Steamworks.

---
Install Proton locally
---
Steam ships with several versions of Proton, which games will use by default or
that you can select in Steam Settings's SteamPlay page. Steam also supports
running games with local builds of Proton, which you can install on your
machine. The `install` target will perform the below steps for you.

To install a local build of Proton into Steam, make a new directory in
`~/.steam/steam/compatibilitytools.d/` with a tool name of your choosing and
place the contents of `dist` into that folder. The `make install` target will
perform this task for you, installing the Proton build into the Steam folder
for the current user. You will have to restart the Steam client for it to pick
up on a new tool.

A correct local tool installation should look like this:

        compatibilitytools.d/my_proton/
        ├── compatibilitytool.vdf
        ├── filelock.py
        ├── LICENSE
        ├── proton
        ├── proton_dist.tar.gz
        ├── toolmanifest.vdf
        ├── user_settings.sample.py
        └── version

Each component of this software is used under the terms of their licenses.  See
the <tt>LICENSE</tt> files here, as well as the <tt>LICENSE</tt>,
<tt>COPYING</tt>, etc files in each submodule and directory for details. If you
distribute a built version of Proton to other users, you must adhere to the
terms of these licenses.

----
Runtime Config Options
----
Proton can be tuned at runtime to help certain games run. The Steam client sets
some options for known games using the <tt>STEAM_COMPAT_CONFIG</tt> variable.
You can override these options using the environment variables described below.
The best way to set these environment overrides for all games is by renaming
`user_settings.sample.py` to `user_settings.py` and modifying it appropriately.
If you want to change the runtime configuration for a specific game, you can
use the `Set Launch Options` setting in the game's `Properties` dialog in the Steam client. You can launch the
game as you would with "`PROTON_VARIABLE=1 %command%`" [(source)](https://superuser.com/questions/954041/how-to-set-an-environment-variable-for-an-specific-game-on-steam-for-linux#980437).

To enable an option, set the variable to a non-<tt>0</tt> value.  To disable an
option, set the variable to <tt>0</tt>. To use Steam's default configuration, do
not specify the variable at all.

All of the below are runtime options. They do not effect permanent changes to
the Wine prefix. Removing the option will revert to the previous behavior.

| Compat config string  | Environment Variable           | Description  |
| :-------------------- | :----------------------------- | :----------- |
|                       | <tt>PROTON_LOG</tt>            | Convenience method for dumping a useful debug log to `$HOME/steam-$APPID.log`. For more thorough logging, use `user_settings.py`. |
|                       | <tt>PROTON_DUMP_DEBUG_COMMANDS</tt> | When running a game, Proton will write some useful debug scripts for that game into `$PROTON_DEBUG_DIR/proton_$USER/`. |
|                       | <tt>PROTON_DEBUG_DIR<tt>       | Root directory for the Proton debug scripts, `/tmp` by default. |
| <tt>wined3d</tt>      | <tt>PROTON_USE_WINED3D</tt>    | Use OpenGL-based wined3d instead of Vulkan-based DXVK for d3d11 and d3d10. This used to be called `PROTON_USE_WINED3D11`, which is now an alias for this same option. |
| <tt>nod3d11</tt>      | <tt>PROTON_NO_D3D11</tt>       | Disable <tt>d3d11.dll</tt>, for games which can fall back to and run better with d3d9. |
| <tt>noesync</tt>      | <tt>PROTON_NO_ESYNC</tt>       | Do not use eventfd-based in-process synchronization primitives. |
| <tt>galliumnine</tt>  | <tt>PROTON_USE_GALLIUM_NINE</tt> | Use Gallium Nine (can also be enabled on the staging tab in winecfg). |

<!-- Target:  GitHub Flavor Markdown.  To test locally:  pandoc -f markdown_github -t html README.md  -->
